INTRODUCTION

Firetop Mountain - the legendary locale of the ritual battles between
the Mages of Old.  A place where only the greatest survive, and where
the careless quickly meet their end.

"Firetop Mountain" is a play-by-email game concerning the conflict
between powerful wizards in a duel of sorcery.  The opponents perform
magical gestures with their hands to create their supernatural weapons
- spells.  Some spells are so potent as to be able to blind a person,
call forth terrifying creatures, or even kill the unfortunate victim
instantly.  Consequently, wizards must rely on their own cunning to be
able to time enough defensive spells to avoid the brunt of the
adversary's attack, yet deliver sufficient offensive spells of their
own to crack the magical armour of the opponent, and kill the wizard
outright.

The game is an attempt to capture the spirit of such a battle in as
simple yet exciting way as possible.  The inventor pointed out that he
has never been involved in a magical duel but would be interested to
discover how realistic the game is for those who have been involved in
such a bout.

A NOTE ABOUT THESE RULES

They look big, don't they?  Don't be daunted - the bulk of them is the
reference section that contains the detail of every spell that you can
cast.

The best way to approach these might be to skim over the first few
sections to get a feel for the rules, then look at the example game,
which is at the end.  This will give you a good overview of the game,
and you will then be able to look at the spell details as you find you
want to know about them.

Another good way would be to look at the HTML version at:

 http://www.gamerz.net/~fm/

ADMISSION TO FIRETOP MOUNTAIN

In order to register mages to take part in battles on Firetop
Mountain, you must sign on as a User.  This is achieved by sending an
e-mail to the server with the following details:

It must go

  To:fm@gamerz.net

with
 Subject: FM Orders

and with the command

 NewUser UserName Password

in the body. "UserName" is the name that you want to be known by on
the server, and "Password" is the password you will use to identify
valid orders in the future.

For example: NewUser Fred Freddy

You use this User name and password with all subsequent orders you
send to the server.  Once you have a reply from the server
acknowledging your user name, you can register one or more mages, by
sending in a registration command.  For example:

 User Fred Freddy
 Register Merlyn

Once you have registered your Mage, you will receive a list of all the
living mages and their scores, and you can proceed to challenge one or
more of them to a duel!

CHALLENGING YOUR OPPONENT TO A BATTLE

When you register (and at any other time you specify) you receive a
copy of the latest scores and status of all the Wizards of Firetop
Mountain.  You can pick one or more of these who are not currently
engaged in battle and issue a challenge using the NEWGAME order.  The
controllers of the wizards that you challenge will receive an e-mail
notifying them of the challenge.  When they accept, you will receive
an e-mail telling you that the battle is ready to commence.

Alternatively, you can issue the CHALLENGES order and you will receive
a list of 'Open' challenges.  You can join in one of these games if
you like, by using the ACCEPT command.

The battle then takes place at a pace set by the players.  Each round,
each player may have to submit orders.  The server waits until all the
required orders are received, then processes the round and mails out
the results.

At the end of these rules you will find a list of the commands that
the server accepts, including REGISTER, NEWGAME, CHALLENGES and ACCEPT.
You can try these commands out before even proceeding with the rest of
the rules, if you like!  There is commentary on an example game at the
end of this rules.


Slow Games

On average, people playing games by e-mail tend to like to have a few
turns per day.  Some like a lot more, and some are a little slower.
If you want to play at a particular speed, you should check with your
opponent(s) about how fast they will be able to play before accepting
a challenge.  Typically the challenger will issue a comment with the
challenge indicating how fast the game is expected to proceed.

Really slow games will not be allowed to drag on forever.  Every so
often (about twice a week) the janitor runs a program which checks
to see that all the games are progressing.  If a player has not
submitted orders for a week, the server will send that player a
'reminder' notice.  That player will continue to get reminder notices
until either orders are submitted or two weeks has passed.  Once
three weeks has passed without a player submitting orders, the server
will close the game, declaring the opponent to be the winner and
killing off the timed-out mage.

If you have to go away for some time in the middle of a game, you can
contact the game administrator and be put on a list of people 'on
vacation'.  These people are excused from being slow.


THE TURN

Once a challenge has been issued and accepted, each turn the players
send in to the server the directions for their wizards and the
monsters under their wizard's control.  After orders for the players
have been received, the server deals with them as if the actions
specified therein occur simultaneously. Certain spells may alter these
circumstances. For example, you don't get to see all of your
opponent's moves if their wizard is invisible.

Each turn, a player's wizard can either gesture with their hands to
weave part of a spell, stab with their knife, or do nothing. They use
both hands and each hand can act independently or in concord with the
other.

Monsters will obey their master's commands exactly. Monster's may
change controller as a result of enchantment. From that point on the
monster's attacks are directed by the new master. Monsters may make a
single attack each turn against a target chosen by their master or (as
a result of a spell) they may spend the turn doing nothing. Monsters
will attack on the turn in which they are summoned.

Monsters are untrained, unintelligent creatures and can neither
gesture nor cast spells.  Players personally acquainted with monsters
who wish to vouch for their ability to cast spells are requested to
keep quiet.


GESTURES

Spells are created by strings of gestures made with the hands. There are
five single-handed magical gestures:

 the wriggled fingers (F)
 the proffered palm (P)
 the snap (S)
 the wave (W)
 the digit pointing (D)

There is one two-handed magical gesture: the clap (c). Both hands must
be specified as clapping in the same turn for this gesture to be useful.

There also two non-magical gestures:

stab (>)
nothing (-)

The abbreviation for each gesture is used when specifying directions
for the turn.

Spells are cast using an ordered series of gestures. A list of spells
and the gestures used to cast them is given below. For example, three
wriggling finger gestures on consecutive turns (noted as F F F) evokes
a Paralysis spell. Note, however, is that a single gesture can be used
in more than one series and, hence, can be used to cast more than one
spell.

A single gesture may be used in more than one spell provided that: the
gestures have been made in the correct sequence without interruption
no more than one spell is created per gesture and all gestures for one
spell are made with the same hand.

For instance, the left hand could cast the F F F above. In the
following four turns the left hand could gesture (S S D D) to finish
off a Fireball spell since the last five gestures would then be
(F S S D D). Another alternative is to simply perform another (F) for
a second Paralysis spell, as the last three gestures are still
(F F F). If spells are used in a wise manner and frequently overlap,
the overall number of gestures needed to cast them can be cut
dramatically.

If a single gesture can be construed to be the final gesture of two or
more spells then the caster chooses which one to cast. For example,
the last two gestures of a Finger Of Death are the same as Magic
Missile, yet only on odd occasions would the latter spell be chosen in
preference to the former.

Another example of the one-spell-per-gesture concept is the following:

            Right hand:     P P W S    Last 4 gestures form Invisibility
            Left hand:      W W W S    Last 3 gestures form Counter Spell
        
The trouble here is the Invisibility spell needs both hands to perform
certain gestures. However, since the final S of the left hand cannot
be used to cast two spells, it is clear that a choice must be made
between the W W S of the Counter Spell and the P P w s of the
Invisibility.

Here and in the rest of the document a lowercase letter, denotes a
gesture to be performed with both hands simultaneously.  E.g. w
denotes a W by each hand.

If the caster completes a series that casts a spell, intentionally or
unintentionally, the spell must be cast. For example Fire Storm gets
you no matter where it is released. Note also that some of the larger
spells have smaller ones incorporated within their casting series.

All spells and monsters need a target, someone or something to be the
victim.  Each spell (and the "stab" gesture) has a default target,
which is where it will go if you do not specify the target for the
casting hand.  In general, spells with beneficial effects are
defaulted to have the caster as the target.  Spells with adverse
effects are defaulted to have the opposing Wizard as the target.
However, if in doubt, specify the target of your spell!

Specifying the target of each spell to be cast (if the target is not
the default target for the spell) is part of writing the orders for
each round.

Spells can be aborted at any point during their development simply by
performing a gesture which breaks up the series for that spell.  There
is no penalty, save having wasted some time.  Note that no spells
contain Stab or Nothing.  Also note that nonsense (Zen?) gestures such
as C with just one hand are considered the same as Nothing (-) (which
is a fairly Zenlike concept, in and of itself).  Consequently, after
one of these options is taken, all spells for that hand must start
from scratch.  Note also that wizards carry only one dagger and so
cannot stab with both hands at the same time.  Wizards can, however,
change hands for stabbing without wasting time.  Such are the
advantages of physical violence.

Although all spells go off "at the same time", it is sometimes useful
to know which takes effect first.  For example, does a Resist Heat
save you from a Fireball cast in the same turn?  These types of
questions can be answered by referring to the Spell Casting Series
table towards the end of these rules.  If this table doesn't answer
your question, then you may need to find out the answer by
experimentation!

Before the battle commences, the referee casts a Dispel Magic followed
by an Anti Spell at each of the wizards, and each wizard bows to the
opponent, so they cannot commence gesturing prematurely in order to
nearly finish a spell when they start the battle. For the same reason,
being made resistant to fire in your last battle doesn't do you any
good in the next.


MONSTERS

Monsters are created by SUMMON spells.  Monsters usually have a
"controller" who can direct who they will attack.  The control of a
monster can change hands if a Charm Monster spell is cast on the
monster.

All spells have a target, and SUMMON spells are no different.

The target of a SUMMON spell determines who the controller of the
    ^^^^^^                                      ^^^^^^^^^^
monster will be.

Read that last sentence again.  It is very important, and not what
everyone expects!

If the target is a Wizard, that Wizard will become the controller.  If
the target is a monster, then that monster's controller will be the
controller of the new monster.

The initial target of the monster's attacks will be the opponent of
its controller specified for the SUMMON spell.  The TARGET command can
be used to change the target of the monster.


WINNING

Each wizard can sustain fourteen points of damage but dies when
fifteen or more points of damage are done.  When only one wizard
survives (if any do!) that wizard is declared the winner.  The winner
receives points equal to the number of defeated wizards.  Simultaneous
death is a posthumous draw. Damage to wizards and monsters is
cumulative (so you don't have to do it all in one go!).

Wizards may also choose to surrender. This is not a spell, but a pair
of P gestures made by both hands at the same time signals your
surrender. If you surrender, you lose one point but you get to live on
to fight another day.  See the final section for details.

When a wizard dies, their score dies with them.  This is hopefully a
powerful incentive for surrendering before it's too late.


SPELLS

Below you will find a list of spells (plus Stab and Surrender), what
they do, how long they last, and the series of gestures used to cast
them. In the notation used for gesture series, upper case letters are
used as abbreviations except when two simultaneous single-handed
gestures are required. In those cases a lower case letter is used
instead.  Finally there is a short list of spells, intended for use as
a reference sheet for players during the battle.


PROTECTION SPELLS

SHIELD (gesture P)

This spell protects the subject from all attacks from monsters (that
is, creatures created by a summoning spell), from missile spells, and
from stabs by wizards. The shield will block any number of such
attacks but lasts for only one round. The shield protects the subject
on the turn in which it is cast.


REMOVE ENCHANTMENT (gestures P D W P)

Terminates the effects of all Enchantment Spells that have been cast
on the subject including those that are cast on the subject at the
same time as the Remove Enchantment.

Effects which have already passed are not reversed.  For example, the
victim of a Blindness spell would not be able to see what their
opponent's gestures were on the same turn that the Blindness is
removed. Note that all enchantments are removed and the caster may not
pick and choose.  Remove Enchantment also destroys any monster upon
which it is cast, although the monster can attack in that turn.
Wizards suffer no adverse effects from this spell, aside from the
removal of their enchantments.


MAGIC MIRROR (gestures c w)

Spells cast on a subject protected by this spell are reflected back
upon the caster of that spell. When a spell is reflected the very
internals of the spell is also affected, so that not only do
the caster become the target, but the subject of the mirror
also assumes the role of caster of the reflected spell.
The Magic Mirror protects only during the turn in which it was cast.
The protection includes spells like Magic Missile and Lightning Bolt
but does not include attacks by monsters or stabs from wizards.
In case of multiple mirrors in a melee, a Magic Mirror will not
reflect any spells originating from the wizard that the mirror
protects, because the magic of the spell then already will be present
at the inside of the mirror.

The mirror is countered totally if either a Counter Spell or Dispel
Magic is cast on the subject in the same turn as the mirror.  The
mirror has no effect on spells which affect more than one person (such
as Fire Storm).  Two mirrors cast at one subject simultaneously combine
to form a single mirror.



COUNTER SPELL (gestures W P P or W W S)

Any other spell cast upon the subject in the same turn has no
effect.  In the case of blanket spells, which affect more than one
person, the subject of the Counter Spell alone is protected.  For
example, a Fire Storm spell could kill off a monster but not if a
Counter Spell were cast on the monster in the same turn.  Everyone
else would be affected as usual by the Fire Storm unless they had
their own protection.

The Counter Spell will cancel all the spells cast at the subject for
that turn (including Remove Enchantment and Magic Mirror) except
Dispel Magic and Finger Of Death. It will combine with another spell
of its own type for the same effect as if it were alone.  The Counter
Spell will also act as a Shield for its Target.


DISPEL MAGIC (gestures c D P W)

This spell acts as a combination of Counter Spell and Remove
Enchantment, but its effects are universal rather than limited to the
subject of the spell. It will stop any spell cast in the same turn
from working (apart from another dispel magic spell which combines
with it for the same result), and will remove all enchantments from
all beings before they have effect. In addition, all monsters are
destroyed although they can attack that turn. Counter Spells and Magic
Mirrors have no effect. The spell will not work on stabs or
surrenders. As with a Counter Spell it also acts as a Shield for its
subject.


RAISE DEAD (gestures D W W F W c)

The subject of this spell might be any dead human or a dead monster.
When the spell is cast, the dead is braught back to life and all
damage is cured. All enchantments are also removed (as per the spell)
so any diseases or poisons will be neutralized and all other
enchantments removed. The subject will be able to act normally
immediately after the spell is cast. On the turn a monster is raised
it may attack. Wizards may begin gesturing on the turn following their
return from the dead.

This is the only spell which affects the dead. It therefore cannot
be stopped by a counter-spell cast at the dead being. A dispel magic
spell will prevent its effect, since dispel magic affects all spells
no matter what their subject.

If the spell is cast on a live individual, the effect is that of a
cure light wounds recovering five points of damage, or as many as have
been sustained if less than five. Note that any diseases the live
subject might have are not cured. If the target is subject to both
Raise Dead and Finger of Death, the two spells will cancel each other.


CURE LIGHT WOUNDS (gestures D F W)

If the subject has received damage then he is cured by one point as if
that point had not been inflicted.  Thus, for example, if a wizard had
five hit points left and was hit simultaneously by a Cure Light
Wounds and a Lightning Bolt he would finish that turn on one hit
point rather than zero (or six if there had been no Lightning Bolt).
The effect is not removed later by a Dispel Magic or Remove Enchantment.


CURE HEAVY WOUNDS (gestures D F P W)

This spell is similar to Cure Light Wounds in effect but two points of
damage are cured. Note that only one point is cured if only one point
of damage has been sustained or no points is cured if the subject is
completely undamaged.  This spell will also cure any diseases the
subject might have at the time.


SUMMONING SPELLS

SUMMON GOBLIN (gestures S F W)

This spell creates a goblin under the control of the target of the
spell (or the target's controller, if the target is a monster). The
goblin can attack immediately and its victim will be opponent of its
controller. It does one point of damage to its victim per turn and is
destroyed after one point of damage is inflicted upon it.  The
summoning spell cannot be cast at an elemental, and if cast at
something which doesn't exist, the spell has no effect.


SUMMON OGRE (gestures P S F W)

This spell is the same as Summon Goblin but the ogre created inflicts
and is destroyed by two points of damage rather than one.


SUMMON TROLL (gestures F P S F W)

This spell is the same as Summon Goblin but the troll created inflicts
and is destroyed by three points of damage rather than one.


SUMMON GIANT (gestures W F P S F W)

This spell is the same as Summon Goblin but the giant created inflicts
and is destroyed by four points of damage rather than one.


SUMMON ICE ELEMENTAL (gestures c S W W S)

This spell creates an ice elemental.  Casting this spell will cause an
elemental to be created, even if no target is specified.  See below for
more details.


SUMMON FIRE ELEMENTAL (gestures c W S S W)

This spell creates a fire elemental.  Casting this spell will cause an
elemental to be created, even if no target is specified.

The elemental will, for that turn and until destroyed, attack everyone
who is not resistant to its type (heat or cold), causing three points
of damage per turn. The elemental takes three points of damage to be
killed but may be destroyed by spells of the opposite type (e.g. Fire
Storm, Resist Cold or Fireball will kill an ice elemental), and will
also neutralize the cancelling spell. Elementals will not attack on the
turn they are destroyed by such a spell. An elemental will also be
engulfed and destroyed by a storm of its own type but, in such an
event, the storm is not neutralized although the elemental still does
not attack in that turn. Two elementals of the opposite type will also
destroy each other before attacking, and two of the same type will
join together to form a single elemental of normal strength. Note that
only wizards or monsters resistant to the type of elemental, or who
are casting a spell which has the effect of a Shield do not get
attacked by the elemental.  Casting a Fireball upon yourself when
being attacked by an ice elemental is no defence! (Cast it at the
elemental...)


DAMAGING SPELLS

MAGIC MISSILE (gestures S D)

This spell creates a material object of hard substance which is hurled
towards the subject of the spell and causes him one point of
damage. The spell is thwarted by a Shield in addition to the usual
Counter Spell, Dispel Magic and Magic Mirror (the latter causing it to
hit whoever cast it instead).


FINGER OF DEATH (gestures P W P F S S S D)

Kills the subject stone dead. This spell is so powerful that it is
unaffected by a Counter Spell, although a Dispel Magic spell cast upon
the final gesture will stop it. If the target is subject to both Raise
Dead and Finger of Death, the two spells will cancel each other.
The usual way to prevent being harmed by this spell is to disrupt it
during casting using, for example, an Anti Spell.


LIGHTNING BOLT (gestures D F F D D or W D D c)

The subject of this spell is hit by a bolt of lightning and sustains
five points of damage. Resistance to heat or cold is irrelevant. There
are two gesture combinations for the spell, but the shorter one may be
used only once per battle by any wizard. The longer one
may be used without restriction. A Shield spell offers no defence.


CAUSE LIGHT WOUNDS (gestures W F P)

The subject of this spell is inflicted with two points of damage.
Resistance to heat or cold offers no defence. A simultaneous Cure
Light Wounds will serve only to reduce the damage to 1 point. A Shield
has no effect.


CAUSE HEAVY WOUNDS (gestures W P F D)

This has the same effect as Cause Light Wounds but inflicts three
points of damage instead of two.


FIREBALL (gestures F S S D D)

The subject of this spell is hit by a ball of fire and sustains five
points of damage unless he is resistant to fire. If at the same time
an Ice Storm prevails, the subject of the Fireball is instead not
harmed by either spell, although the storm will affect others as
normal. If directed at an ice elemental, the fireball will destroy it
before it can attack. Fire elementals are not harmed by a fireball.


FIRE STORM (gestures S W W c)

Everything not resistant to heat sustains 5 points of damage that
turn.  The spell cancels wholly, causing no damage, with either an Ice
Storm or an ice elemental.  It will destroy but not be destroyed by a
fire elemental.  Two Fire Storms act as one.


ICE STORM  (gestures W S S c)

Everything not resistant to cold sustains 5 points of damage that
turn.  The spell cancels wholly, causing no damage, with either a Fire
Storm or a fire elemental, and will cancel locally with a Fireball.  It
will destroy but not be destroyed by an ice elemental.  Two Ice Storms
act as one.


ENCHANTMENT SPELLS

AMNESIA (gestures D P P)

If the subject of this spell is a wizard, next turn he will repeat
identically the gestures he made in the current turn, including stabs.

If the subject of the spell is a monster or elemental, it forgets to
attack in that round.  If the subject is simultaneously the subject of
any of Confusion, Charm Person, Charm Monster, Fear or another Amnesia
then none of the spells work.


CONFUSION (gestures D S F)

If the subject of this spell is a wizard, next turn he submits orders
as usual.  However, during resolution of the round, the server will
randomly determine which hand is affected, and will randomly replace
the ordered gesture with one of the six possible spell gestures.

If the subject of the spell is a monster, it attacks at random that
turn. If the subject is also the subject of any of: Amnesia,
Confusion, Charm Person, Charm Monster or Fear, none of the spells
work.


CHARM PERSON (gestures P S D F)

Except for cancellation with other enchantments, this spell only
affects humans. The subject of the spell submits orders as normal, but
the caster of the spell also submits an order for one of the subject's
hands, using the command "DIRECT". The server uses the order submitted
by the caster for the next turn. If the caster do no submit any
"DIRECT" command the following turn, the target will do his or her
gestures as normal. If the subject is only so because of a reflection
from a Magic Mirror the subject of the mirror assumes the role of caster and
decides his opponent's gesture. If the subject is also the subject of
any of Amnesia, Confusion, Charm Person, Charm Monster, or Fear, none
of the spells work.


CHARM MONSTER (gestures P S D D)

Except for cancellation with other enchantments, this spell only
affects monsters (excluding elementals). Control of the monster is
transferred to the caster of the spell (or retained by him) as of this
turn, i.e. the monster will attack whosoever its new controller
dictates from that turn onwards including that turn. Further charms
are, of course, possible, transferring as before. If the subject of
the charm is also the subject of any of: Amnesia, Confusion, Charm
Person, Charm Monster, Fear, none of the spells work.


PARALYSIS (gestures F F F)

If the subject of the spell is a wizard, then on the following turn
the caster selects one of the wizard's hands and on the that turn that
hand is paralyzed into the position it was in the turn before. If the
wizard already had a paralyzed hand, it must be the same hand which is
paralyzed again. Certain gestures remain the same but if the hand
being paralyzed is performing a C, S or W it is instead paralyzed into
F, D or P respectively, otherwise it will remain in the original position
(this allows repeated stabs).

A favourite ploy is to continually paralyze a hand (F F F F F F etc.)
into a non P gesture and then set a monster on the subject so that he
has to use his other hand to protect himself, but then has no defence
against other magical attacks.

If the subject of the spell is a monster or an elemental it simply
does not attack in the turn in which the spell was cast.

If the subject of the spell is also the subject of any of Amnesia,
Confusion, Charm Person, Charm Monster, Fear or another Paralysis,
the Paralysis does not work.

If the caster does not choose a hand of the target to be paralyzed
(using the PARALYZE order), a random hand will be paralyzed.


FEAR (gestures S W D)

If the subject of this spell is a wizard, then on the turn following
the casting of this spell, the subject cannot perform a C, D, F or S
gesture. If the subject of the spell is a monster (excluding
elementals which are unaffected), it will be too afraid to attack in
that round.  If the subject is also the subject of Amnesia, Confusion,
Charm Person, Charm Monster, or another Fear, then none of the spells
work.


ANTI SPELL (gestures S P F P)

On the turn following the casting of this spell, the subject cannot
include any gestures made on or before this turn in a spell sequence
and must restart a new spell from the beginning of that spell
sequence. The spell does not affect spells which are cast on the same
turn nor does it affect monsters.


PROTECTION (gestures W W P)

For this turn and the following 3 turns the subject of this spell is
protected as if using a Shield spell, thus leaving both hands free.
Concurrent Shield spells offer no further protection and compound
Protection spells merely overlap offering no extra cover.


RESIST HEAT (gestures W W F P)

The subject of this spell becomes totally resistant to all forms of
heat attack (Fireball, Fire Storm and fire elementals). Only Dispel
Magic or Remove Enchantment will terminate this resistance once
started (although a Counter Spell will prevent it from working if cast
at the subject at the same time as this spell). A Resist Heat cast
directly on a fire elemental will destroy it before it can attack that
turn, but there is no effect on ice elementals.


RESIST COLD (gestures S S F P)

The effects of this spell are identical to Resist Heat but resistance
is to cold (Ice Storm and ice elementals) and it destroys ice
elementals if they are the subject of the spell but doesn't affect
fire elementals.


DISEASE (gestures D S F F F c)

The subject of this spell immediately contracts a deadly
(non contagious) disease which will kill him at the end of 6 turns
counting from the one upon which the spell is cast. The malady is
cured by Remove Enchantment or Cure Heavy Wounds or Dispel Magic in
the meantime.


POISON (gestures D W W F W D)

This has the same effect as the disease spell, but Cure Heavy Wounds
does not cure it.


BLINDNESS (gestures D W F F d)

For the next 3 turns not including the one in which the spell was
cast, the subject is unable to see. If he is a wizard, he cannot tell
what his opponent's gestures are, although he will be informed of any
which affect him (e.g. summons spells, Magic Missile etc. cast at him)
but not Counter Spells to his own attacks. Indeed he will not know if
his own spells work unless they also affect him (e.g. a Fire Storm
when he isn't resistant to fire.)  He can control his monsters (he can
say 'Attack that cursed Zarquon'), but he cannot direct his spells at
things that he cannot see.

Blinded monsters are instantly destroyed and cannot attack in that
turn.


INVISIBILITY (gestures P P w s)

For the next 3 turns not including the one in which the spell was
cast, the subject of the spell becomes invisible to his opponent and
all monsters. Any spells he creates that do not affect anyone that is
visible, and his gestures, cannot be seen by his opponents. 

Spells targeted at invisible mages will miss.  An invisible mage
cannot be attacked by monsters, although monsters can be directed at
him in case he becomes visible prematurely. Wizards can still stab and
direct spells at him, with the same hope.

Any monster made invisible is destroyed due to the unstable nature of
such magically created creatures, and doesn't get to attack that turn.


HASTE (gestures P W P W W c)

For the next 3 turns, the subject (but not his monsters if a wizard)
makes an extra set of gestures due to being speeded up. This takes
effect immediately, so that immediately after the turn in which the
Haste is cast the Hastened wizard gets a "free" set of orders.
Non-hastened wizards and monsters can see everything the hastened
individual is doing.

Note that any spells cast by non-hastened wizards do not expire before
the end of the extra hastened turn. This means that (for example) a
Shield cast by a non-hastened wizard would also protect him against a
stab from a hastened wizard in the hastened wizard's free turn.


TIME STOP (gestures S P P F D or S P P c)

The subject of this spell immediately takes an extra turn, on which
no one can see or know about unless they are harmed. All non affected
beings have no resistance to any form of attack, e.g. a wizard halfway
through the duration of a Protection spell can be harmed by a monster
which has had its time stopped. Time stopped monsters attack whoever
their controller instructs, and time stopped elementals affect
everyone, resistance to heat or cold being immaterial in that turn.


DELAY EFFECT (gestures D W S S S P)

This spell only works if cast upon a wizard. One of the next spells he
completes, provided it is on one of the next 3 turns, is "banked"
until needed, i.e. it fails to work until its caster desires. The
spell to be banked is selected using the DELAY command. Note that
spells banked are those cast by the subject not those cast at him. The
target of the spell is banked along with the spell itself (i.e. the
complete effect of the spell, including target, is what gets saved).
Remember that P is a Shield spell, and surrender is not a spell. A
wizard may only have one spell banked at any one time.


PERMANENCY (gestures S P F P S D W)

This spell only works if cast upon a wizard. Any spell he completes
(i.e. completes the gestures of and casts), provided it is on one of the
next 3 turns, and which falls into the category of "Enchantments"
(except Anti Spell, Disease, Poison, or Time Stop) can have its effect
made permanent.

Note that the person who has his spell made permanent does not
necessarily have to make himself the subject of the spell. A
Permanency spell cannot increase the duration of another Permanency,
nor a spell which is being banked by Delay Effect.

Note that an attempt to make permanent an enchantment spell that is
countered (or fails for any other reason) still uses up the
Permanency.


NON SPELLS

SURRENDER (gestures p)

This is not a spell and consequently cannot be cast at anyone. The
wizard making these gestures, irrespective of whether they terminate
spells or not, surrenders and the contest is over.  If the gestures
_do_ complete spells, those spells will be cast as usual - the
surrender does not happen until the end of the round.  The
surrendering wizard is deemed to have lost unless his gestures
completed spells which killed all remaining opponents, in which
case he loses no points, but does not get any points either.

Two or more simultaneous surrenders count as a draw, and the victory
points are divided between the surviving mages ... rounded down.

It is a skill for wizards to work their spells so that they never
accidentally perform 2 P gestures simultaneously. It is too late to
surrender on the turn you are killed - if you are killed as you make
the surrender gesture, you will still die. However, if you live to the
end of the turn, the referee will cure any diseases, poisons etc. in
time for your next battle.


STAB (gesture >)

This is not a spell but an attack which can be directed at any
individual monster or wizard. Unless protected in that turn by a
Shield spell or another spell with the same effect, the being stabbed
suffers 1 point of damage. The wizard only has one knife so can only
stab with one hand in any turn, although which hand doesn't
matter. The stab cannot be reflected by a Magic Mirror or stopped by
Dispel Magic (although its Shield effect *could* stop the
stab). Clumsy wizards _are_ allowed to stab themselves. Knives cannot
be thrown.


ORDERS

Orders can be sent in the body of an e-mail:

To: FM@gamerz.net

 with

Subject: FM Orders

An e-mail that you send to the server like this is called an
'orderset'.

There are two type of orders that you can send to the server:
'administration orders' and 'mage commands'.

Hopefully it's fairly obvious that 'administration commands' are used
to tell the server about games and players, whereas 'mage commands' are
used to tell the server what you want your mage to do.

A summary of the possible administration orders follows:

  NEWUSER <New Username> <New Password>
  USER <Username> <Password>
  CHANGEUSER <New UserName>

  SCORES {<Options>}
  STANDINGS {<Options>}
  GAMES {<Game Numbers>}
  LIST {<Game Numbers>}
  CHALLENGES
  INFO {<Mage/User List>}
  RULES
  HELP
  FAQ
  MESSAGE <Mage Name> <Mage/User List>
  ANNOUNCE <Game Numbers>

  RESEND {<Number>}
  REPLAY <Game Number> {<Turn Number>}
  SHOW <Game Numbers>
  DESCRIBE <Game Numbers>
  SUBSCRIBE <Game Numbers>
  STATS {<Options>}

  REGISTER <Mage Name>
  ADDRESS  <New Address>
  PASSWORD <New Password>
  VACATION <Days>
  RETIRE   <Mage Name>
  QUIT     <Mage Name>

  NEWGAME  <Mage Name> <Options>

  ACCEPT     <Game Number> <Mage Name> {<Options>}
  DECLINE    <Game Number> <Mage Name>
  CHANGEGAME <Game Number> <Mage Name> <Options>
  OPPOSE     <Game Number> <Mage Name> CHANGE <Number>
  WITHDRAW   <Game Number> <Mage Name>


And here is a summary of the possible 'mage commands':

  MOVE <Game Number> <Mage Name>
  GAME <Game Number> <Mage Name>
  MAGE <Mage Name>

  TURN <Turn Number>

  LH <Gesture>
  RH <Gesture>

  TARGET <Hand> <Target Name>
  TARGET <Monster Name> <Victim Name>

  CHOOSE <Hand> <Spell Name>

  PERMANENT <Hand>
  PARALYZE <Hand> <Mage Name>
  DIRECT <Hand> <Gesture> <Mage Name>
  DELAY <Hand>
  FIRE

  SAY <One Liner>

  END


The details of the orders you can send to the server are listed below.
All ordersets must begin with a USER command. The exception from
this is if you issue a NEWUSER command to register a new user for
the first time. No persons are allowed to have more than one
user at the Firetop Mountain. Anyone who has that will be considered
cheating. You can include blank lines between commands, and anything
after a ";" on any line is ignored, except on a line that is part of a
SAY, MESSAGE or ANNOUNCE command. Anything after an END command is ignored.

Commands are not case sensitive.  Passwords _are_ case sensitive.
Furthermore, the first character of a Name must be a capital letter
(if you don't capitalize it, the server will).  Names and passwords
can be made of alpha-numeric characters only.

Each orderset should contain only one type of orders: administration
orders or mage commands.  The exception is the USER command that all
ordersets have to start with. An orderset that contains mage commands must
have a MOVE or GAME or MAGE command at the top that specifies the game. You
can only have one MOVE/GAME/MAGE command per orderset.

You can only have one challenge-command (NEWGAME, ACCEPT, DECLINE,
CHANGEGAME, OPPOSE, WITHDRAW) in each orderset.

Each orderset should end with an END command.

If there are any glaring errors in orders that the server receives, it
will return them with an explanation of what is wrong, and you can try
again.  It will pick up wrong passwords, or nonsense commands.  It
will not prevent you from stabbing yourself, or curing your opponent,
however.

Once a correct orderset containing mage commands for a particular game
has been received from you, you cannot submit a different orderset for
that game until the round has been completed.  Sorcery is not an
occupation where you can change you mind halfway through!

Finally, the orders (anything enclosed in braces {} is optional):

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
NEWUSER <New UserName> <New Password>     e.g. NEWUSER Harry grnf

This command should be used by new users that wish to establish a
user at the Firetop Mountain. Note that having more than one user
is considered cheating. Passwords _are_ case sensitive.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
USER <User Name> <Password>               e.g. USER Harry grnf

This command must be the first command in all orders that you
send to the Firetop Mountain, so that the server knows which
user that is sending the orders.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
CHANGEUSER <New UserName>                 e.g. CHANGEUSER Osse

If you do not like your username, you may change it with this
command. This command should not be used often.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
SCORES {<Options>}                        e.g.  SCORES duel
                                                SCORES melee

Include the complete list of wizards, their scores and their status in
your report.

The game keeps two scores for each wizard: a 'duel' score and a
'melee' score.  This is because the skills used in duels (2 player
games) are rather different to those used in melees (games with more
than 2 players).

The options for the SCORES command are 'duel', 'melee' and 'all'.  If
you don't give any options the server will try to guess which you
meant based on your other orders.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
STANDINGS {<Options>}                     e.g.  STANDINGS all

Identical to the SCORES order.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
GAMES {<Game Numbers>}                    e.g.  GAMES
                                                GAMES 54 87 109

If no game numbers are specified, include a complete list of the duels
in progress, and their current status, and a list of past games for
which there are records, in your report. Otherwise give you the same
info for the list of games that you have specified.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
LIST {<Game Numbers>}

Identical to the GAMES order.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
CHALLENGES

Include a complete list of the challenges made, whether they are open
or closed, and the mages allowed in each game, in your report.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
INFO {<Mage/User List>}                   e.g.  INFO
                                          INFO Gandalf Froodal Harry

Returns info about the mages and/or users mentioned in the list.
If no list is given, it returns info about all the users.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
RULES

Order a copy of these rules.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
HELP

The same as RULES. Order a copy of these rules.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
FAQ

Order a copy of the Firetop Mountain Frequently Asked Questions file.
(which includes answers as well!)

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
MESSAGE <Mage Name> <Recipients>

Use this command to send an e-mail message to the owners of one or more
mages or users (without having to find their e-mail address yourself).

Any text in your orders after the MESSAGE command and up to the words

END MESSAGE

alone on a line will be sent to the recipients.  Each recipient may be
either a mage name or a user name. Recipients names are to be
separated by space.

e.g.

MESSAGE Gandalf  Froodal Harry
That was a great game!   Let's do it again!
END MESSAGE

will send a message from Gandalf to the owners of Froodal and Harry.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
ANNOUNCE <Game Numbers>

Send an announcement to all participiants in one or more games.
You can only send announcements to games in which you participate
with a mage.

Any text in your orders after the ANNOUNCE command and up to the words

END ANNOUNCE

on a line by itself will be sent to the recipients.

e.g.

ANNOUNCE 42
It is not fair to attack my mage all of you at once.
END ANNOUNCE

will send this announcement to all players in game 42.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
RESEND <How Many>                         e.g.  RESEND 3

This command asks the server to resend the last <How Many> emails that
it sent you.

If you don't specify <How Many>, it sends you the last email that it sent you.

This command will only resend emails that were originally sent to the
address that the server knows about for your user.  If you had submited
orders from a different account and did not use the USER command,
replies to those orders will not be resent.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
REPLAY <Game Number> {<Turn Number>}       e.g.  REPLAY 54 9T

Replay a turn for you, exactly as the turn happened. If no turn
number is given, replay the last turn if there is any. This command
only works for games that are currently being played (the game is
not finished yet).

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
SHOW <Game Numbers>                        e.g.  SHOW 54

This command returns a summary of the specified game(s) - a
round-by-round list of all the gestures and spells cast in a game.
This terse summary is ideal for analysing a game, once you get used to
the format.

If the game has not started, this command returns a summary of the
challenge status - all the details of who has accepted and what
changes are proposed.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
DESCRIBE <Game Numbers>                    e.g.  DESCRIBE 54

This command returns a complete list of all the events that occurred in
the specified game.  This verbose, human readable, format is ideal for
reading about what happened in a game without too much effort.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
SUBSCRIBE <Game Numbers>                    e.g.  SUBSCRIBE 54

With this command you subscribe to the speciefied game(s).
That is you get the same game reports as the players in the game
for each turn in the game. This way you can observe a game "live"
as it is being played on the server.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
STATS {Options}                           e.g. STATS SpellUse
                                          or STATS Info WizActive

This command returns the requested statistics/information about the
Firetop Mountain server.  There are a number of groups of statistics:
you can list the names of the groups you want to see.  If you don't
specify which ones you will get them all (this is how to find out
what statistics groups are available).

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
REGISTER <Mage Name>                      e.g. REGISTER Merlyn

Use this command to register a new Wizard with the server.

The first character of a <Mage Name> must be a capital letter
(if you don't capitalize it, the server will). Names and passwords
can be made of alpha-numeric characters only.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
ADDRESS <New Address>                     e.g. ADDRESS camelot@uk.com

Use this command to change the address that the server uses to mail
you reports.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
VACATION <Days>                           e.g. VACATION 3

This command will put all your mages on the vacation list for
so many days as you specify. The autonagger will the not terminate
you mages for being late in any games while you are on vacation.
When you then give any new orders to the server again, it will
assume that you are back from vacation.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
PASSWORD <New Password>                   e.g. PASSWORD FroppleBoz

Use this command to change the password for your user.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
RETIRE <Mage Name>                        e.g. RETIRE Merlyn

If you decide that your mage no longer wants to participate in battles,
you can retire.

If you have a positive score, it will remain in the Honour Roll,
but people will no longer be able to challenge you.  If at any time
you want your mage to come out of retirement, you can simply issue a
challenge to someone else or accept a challenge.  It is preferable to
retire rather than continually decline challenges.

If you retire with zero score, your wizard is deemed to have left
Firetop Mountain to go and seek further instruction before returning
to try again.

Your mage will be automatically retired after a period of inactivity.
Retired mages will be automatically quitted after a longer period of
inactivity.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
QUIT <Mage Name>                          e.g. QUIT Merlyn

If you decide that your mage no longer wants to participate in battles,
you can quit.

Quitting is more permanent than retire, and in effect will kill off
your mage. This is normally only for use if you no longer wish to play
Firetop Mountain (but why :) ?!?).

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
QUIT

If you no longer wish to play Firetop Mountain you must first QUIT
all your mages, then you can submit a QUIT command without a mage
name to terminate you user account. You can not quit if you still
have one or more mages in play.

We hope you enjoyed playing while it lasted, and you are always
welcome to register again as a new user later.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
NEWGAME <Mage Name> <Options>
  e.g. NEWGAME Merlyn CHALLENGE Froodal Gandalf

  or NEWGAME Merlyn OPEN, LIMIT 4, COMMENT Looking for a fast battle!

Use this command to challenge your opponent(s) to a battle.  You give
your mage name first, then the details of the challenge.
The first example challenges the wizards Froodal and Gandalf to a
melee.  The second example announces a battle that anyone can join (OPEN), 
that will commence when 3 other mages have joined in (LIMIT 4).

You will be notified when your opponent(s) is/are ready for battle.

Here is a complete list of the options.  Each must be separated by a
comma when you submit your orders.

     challenge <Name list>
     add <Name list>
     open {<Number>}
     closed
     exclude <Name list>
     all
     limit <Number>
     nolimit
     spellbook <Name of spell book>
     authoritarian
     democratic
     comment

Explanation of the options:

  challenge <Name list>:
  add <Name list>:
    Use this option to list the mages you want to challenge.
    ('add' is a shorthand for 'challenge')

  open {<Number>}:
    This option is to specify that you want the challenge to be
    open to any mages that want to join. The optional number
    is a maximum limit of how many mages controlled by a single
    player that may accept the challenge. What most players want is
    usually "open 1", so this is the default if you omit the number.
    Use "open 0" if you want the number of mages pr. user to be
    unlimited.

  closed:
    The opposite of an open game. Only those that are challenged may
    join the game. This is the default behavior, so you do not have
    to specify this option if you do not want to.

  exclude <Name list>:
    This option is to specify mages you do not want to include
    in the challenge (this is useful only with an 'open' challenge).

  all:
    If you want to challenge all mages that are currently available.
    This implies the option "open". If you want it different,
    you may put a "closed" option after it. If opposite options
    are specified, the last one always takes effect.

  limit <Number>:
    Set a limit to how many mages is accepted in the game. This must
    be more than 1. When <Number> mages have accepted the challenge
    (including the challenger), the rest will be excluded and the game
    begins.

  nolimit:
    The game will not begin before all mages that have been challenged
    have accepted to join.  If you set this option on an 'open' game,
    then the game will never start automatically, since it will always
    be waiting for more players to join.  You will be able to start it
    with the 'start' option to the CHANGEGAME command, though (see
    below).  This option is default, so you do not have to specify it
    if you do not want to.

  spellbook <Name of spell book>:
    This will choose which spell book to use during the battle.
    If the option is omitted, the standard spell book is used.
    For now <Name of spell book> can be Classic, Standard or NoMonsters.

  authoritarian:
    Usually if any changes is made to the new game, the other players
    (those who have accepted the challenge so far) get a chance to
    say if they accept these new options or not. If this option is
    set, no such democratic process takes place, and the mage who
    initially set up the game gets to decide everything.

  democratic:
    This option is default, and does not need to be specified.
    If someone want to change some options, the other players
    are requested to accept or oppose the proposed changes to the game.

  comment:
    Use this option to attach a comment to the challenge.  This
    comment will be included in any mail that players receive about the
    challenge. This option must be the last - anything after the
    'COMMENT' option is taken as part of the comment.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
ACCEPT <Game Number> <Mage Name> {<Option>}
  e.g. ACCEPT 10 Merlyn
  or   ACCEPT 11 Merlyn CHANGE 2

Use this command to accept a challenge.  You give the game number
first, then your mage name, then your password.

You can also use this option to accept a proposed change to a game
(see CHANGEGAME below).  The possible <Option>s are:

  change <number>:
    Use this to specify which change you accept.

  everything:
    Use this to accept all changes ever proposed to the game.
    (Both current and all future proposed changes.)

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
DECLINE <Game Number> <Mage Name>
  e.g. DECLINE 10 Whimpo

You use this command to decline a challenge.  If you have already
accepted a challenge, but want to get out of it before it starts, you
can also use this command.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
CHANGEGAME <Game Number> <Mage Name> <Options>
  e.g. CHANGEGAME 10 Merlyn START

Use this command to change a game, or at least propose a change to a
game.

Here is a complete list of the options.  Each must be separated by a
comma when you submit your orders.

     add <Name list>
     challenge <Name list>
     exclude <Name list>
     start
     all
     open {<number>}
     closed
     limit <number>
     nolimit
     spellbook <Name of spell book>
     authoritarian
     democratic
     comment

Explanation of the options:

  add <Name list>:
  challenge <Name list>:
    To add more mages to be challenged.
    Handy if many of those originally challenged declines.
    ('challenge' is a substitute for 'add')

  exclude <Name list>:
    This option is to specify which mages you do not want to include
    in the challenge if it is an open challenge, or to exclude mages
    that are challenged in a normal closed challenge that you do not
    want to challenge after all for some reason.
    Those who have already accepted the challenge cannot be excluded.

  start:
   Use this option to cause the game to start immediately.  All mages
   who have not accepted are excluded from the game, and all proposed
   (but not accepted) changes are abandoned: the battle commences with
   the currently accepted mages and conditions.

  open {<number>}:
    This option is to specify that you want the challenge to be
    open to any mages that want to join. The optional number
    is a maximum limit of how many mages controlled by a single
    player that may accept the challenge. What most players want is
    usually "open 1", so this is the default if you omit the number.
    Use "open 0" if you want the number of mages pr. user to be
    unlimited.

  closed:
    The opposite of an open game. Only those that are challenged may
    join the game.

  all:
    If you want to add all mages that are currently available to
    the list of those that are challenged. This also implies a
    change to "open".

  limit <number>:
    Set a limit to how many mages is accepted. Must be more than 1,
    and not less than the number of mages that have already accepted
    the challenge. When <number> mages have accepted the challenge
    (including the challenger), the rest will be excluded and the game
    begins.

  nolimit:
    Do not set any limit to the number of mages in the game.

  spellbook <Name of spell book>:
    Same as for the NEWGAME command. Change the current
    choise of which spell book to use during the battle.
    For now <Name of spell book> can be Classic, Standard or
    NoMonsters.

  authoritarian:
    Same as for the NEWGAME command. Note that the one who initiated
    the game will be in charge, not the one who proposed to set
    this option.

  democratic:
    Change from authorative setup to democratic. See the same option
    for the NEWGAME command.

  comment:
    Use this option to change the comment attached to the challenge.
    This comment is included in any mail that players receive about
    the challenge. This option must be the last - anything after the
    'COMMENT' option is taken as part of the comment.

If the game is democratic, each mage will have the chance to vote for
or against your change (see the ACCEPT order).  When more than 50% of
the mages have voted for it, it will be adopted. In case of a draw,
the one who initated the challenge has a double vote.

If the game is authoritarian, only the player who initated it will be
able to make changes using CHANGEGAME.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
OPPOSE <Game Number> <Mage Name> CHANGE <Number>
  e.g.   OPPOSE 11 Merlyn CHANGE 2

Use this command to oppose a change to a game (see CHANGEGAME command).

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
WITHDRAW <Game Number> <Mage Name>
  e.g. WITHDRAW 10 Merlyn

Use this command to withdraw a challenge that you have previously
issued.  This command completely cancels the game created by NEWGAME.



 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
GAME <Game Number> <Mage Name>            e.g. GAME 1 Merlyn
MOVE <Game Number> <Mage Name>            e.g. MOVE 1 Merlyn
MAGE <Mage Name>                          e.g. MAGE Merlyn

These commands are used to begin a normal orderset for each turn of a
battle that has actually started.

Orders that include one of these commands must end with an END
command, and it can only be one GAME/MOVE/MAGE command in each mail.

If at any time you just want to see the status of your game (to see if
its waiting for your orders, for example) you can send in just a GAME
command followed by an END command.

The MOVE command is identical to the GAME command in every way, and is
there as a synonym for historical reasons. With the newer MAGE command,
you do not have to specify the game number, since the server keeps
track of which games your mages are involved in.


The following commands only make sense issued after a GAME command...

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
TURN <Turn Number>                        e.g.  TURN 10

The TURN command is an optional command to tell the server what turn
the orders are for.  When the server receives a TURN command, it
checks to see if in fact the game in question is at the specified
turn. If it is not, the orders are rejected.  This can be a useful
insurance against e-mail problems.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
LH <Gesture>                              e.g. LH >
RH <Gesture>                              e.g. RH P

Use these commands to indicate what you want to do with each hand. If
the server is expecting you to submit any orders, it will be expecting
you to submit orders for both hands.  Orders which omit one hand will
be rejected.  "RH" is used to indicate the right hand, and "LH" to
indicate the left. The gestures are as described in the first section.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
TARGET <Hand> <Target Name>               e.g. TARGET LH Froodal

Use this command to indicate where you want any actions associated
with a particular hand to go.  Valid hands are LH, RH and BH. "BH"
means "both hands" and is what is used if a spell is being activated
as a result of a gesture requiring both hands.

It is vital to note that all actions have a target whether you want
them to or not, and the target for a given hand will be the default
target for the spell for that hand unless you explicitly say
otherwise.

You can use any name that you see printed in the Status section of
your report, as a valid target.  You can also target a monster that
you think your opponent is about to create.  You do this by saying

TARGET LH RH:BadGuy

This says that you want to aim your Left Hand spell at the monster
that BadGuy is about to create with his Right Hand.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
TARGET MonsterName VictimName        e.g. TARGET RedishGreenGoblin Merlyn

This variation of the TARGET command is used to change the target of a
monster.  Obviously it will only succeed if you are the controller of
the monster.  Know that "no one" or "nobody" are valid targets.

You can attempt to set the target of a monster that you are going to
gain control of via Charm Monster.  If your charm succeeds, the
monster will attack the target you specify.

You can attempt also to set the target of a monster that is going to
be created in the coming round.  You do this by saying

TARGET RH:MyName UglyMage

This says that you want the monster you are about to create with your
Right Hand to attack UglyMage.

(Note that this is very different to saying "TARGET RH UglyMage".  The
latter command aims your Right Hand spell at UglyMage. If it is a
summon spell, this would mean giving away your monster.)

This means that you can actually charm and direct a monster that your
opponent is going to create this round.  If you cast the Charm Monster
with your Right Hand, and your opponent is casting Summon Goblin with
his Left Hand, the commands might look like this:

  CHOOSE RH Charm Monster

  TARGET RH LH:BadGuy         ; we want to charm BadGuy's Left Hand monster

  TARGET LH:BadGuy GreenOgre  ; we want his monster to attack GreenOgre

Of course, he could cast Counter Spell at the monster he is about to
create - this would thwart your Charm, and the monster would remain
under his control!

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
CHOOSE <Hand> <Spell Name>                e.g. CHOOSE BH Magic Mirror

As mentioned earlier, sometimes a given set of gestures could invoke
more than one spell.  In this case, the wizard gets to choose which
spell is to be cast - the CHOOSE order is used for this.  If your
gestures result in a choice you were not expecting, you will receive
an e-mail asking you to choose.  However, if you know that a choice
will result, you can include the CHOOSE order in the same mail as the
GESTURE orders _after_ both GESTURE orders.  This saves the exchange
of an e-mail with the server.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
PERMANENT <Hand>                          e.g. PERMANENT LH

The Permanency spell allows you to cast a spell with permanent effect.
Use this order to specify that the given hand is now completing the
spell which you would like to be permanent.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
PARALYZE <Hand> <Mage Name>               e.g. PARALYZE RH Gandalf

The Paralyze spell allows you to freeze one of your opponent's hands.
Use this order in the turn after you cast a Paralyze spell to specify
which hand will be paralyzed.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
DIRECT <Hand> <Gesture> <Mage Name>       e.g. DIRECT LH P Gandalf

The Charm Person spell allows you to take control of one of your
opponent's hands.  Use this order in the turn after you cast a Charm
Person to specify which of their hands you want to do what.  Note that
you do not get to specify the target of that hand.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
DELAY <Hand>

Use this command to indicate that the spell completed by <Hand> is to
be saved up instead of cast immediately. (You can only do this if you
have been the target of a Delay Effect spell in one of the previous
three rounds). The spell _and_ its target are saved at this time.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
FIRE

Use this command to cast the spell that you saved up using DELAY.

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
SAY <One Liner>
  e.g.  SAY "Ouch! I goofed that time!"

Use this command to make your wizard say something on the next battle
report.  Because spellcasting involves high concentration and
incantation accompanying the gestures, a wizard can only say one thing
to the opponent per round!

 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
END

You must end your orders with "END".
The server does not look at anything after the END command.



----------------------------------------------------------------------
SPELL CASTING SERIES

This table shows the gestures required to cast each spell.

c D P W       Dispel Magic           P S D F          Charm Person
c S W W S     Summon Ice Elemental   P S F W          Summon Ogre
c W S S W     Summon Fire Elemental  P W P F S S S D  Finger Of Death
c w           Magic Mirror           P W P W W c      Haste
D F F D D     Lightning Bolt         S D              Magic Missile
D F P W       Cure Heavy Wounds      S F W            Summon Goblin
D F W         Cure Light Wounds      S P F P          Anti Spell
D P P         Amnesia                S P F P S D W    Permanency
D S F         Confusion              S P P F D        Time Stop
D S F F F c   Disease                S P P c          Time Stop
D W F F d     Blindness              S S F P          Resist Cold
D W S S S P   Delay Effect           S W D            Fear
D W W F W c   Raise Dead             S W W c          Fire Storm
D W W F W D   Poison                 W D D c        + Lightning Bolt
F F F         Paralysis              W F P            Cause Light Wounds
F P S F W     Summon Troll           W F P S F W      Summon Giant
F S S D D     Fireball               W P F D          Cause Heavy Wounds
P             Shield                 W P P            Counter Spell
p           ! Surrender              W S S c          Ice Storm
P D W P       Remove Enchantment     W W F P          Resist Heat
P P w s       Invisibility           W W P            Protection
P S D D       Charm Monster          W W S            Counter Spell


!   This is not a spell
+   Each wizard may use this spell once per battle, then the gestures have
    no effect.


The next table lists the spells in the order that they would take
effect if they were all cast in the same round.  It also shows the
default target for each spell (s - self, o - opponent).

           s   Dispel Magic
           s   Counter Spell
           s   Magic Mirror
           s   Summon Goblin
           s   Summon Ogre
           s   Summon Troll
           s   Summon Giant
               Summon Fire Elemental
               Summon Ice Elemental
           s   Raise Dead
           s   Haste
           s   Time Stop
           s   Protection
           s   Resist Heat
           s   Resist Cold
           o   Paralysis
           o   Amnesia
           o   Fear
           o   Confusion
           s   Charm Monster
           o   Charm Person
           o   Disease
           o   Poison
           s   Cure Light Wounds
           s   Cure Heavy Wounds
           o   Anti Spell
           o   Blindness
           s   Invisibility
           s   Permanency
           s   Delay Effect
           o   Remove Enchantment
           s   Shield
           o   Magic Missile
           o   Cause Light Wounds
           o   Cause Heavy Wounds
           o   Lightning Bolt
           o   Fireball
           o   Finger of Death
               Fire Storm
               Ice Storm

----------------------------------------------------------------------

EXAMPLE GAME

To give you an idea how a game might proceed, here is an example game
between two wizards "Froodal" and "Bung".  First, here are the orders
that they had to give to get registered and get the game started:

Froodal                                Bung
----------                             -----------
                                       newuser Bill heh
newuser Frode w1n
                                       register Bung
register Froodal

user Frode w1n
NEWGAME Froodal challenge Bung

                                       user Bill heh
                                       accept 12 Bung


At this stage, each player would receive an e-mail similar to this:

  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

From: Firetop Mountain Referee <fm@gamerz.net>
Subject: A Duel has Commenced!

Froodal,

Bung has accepted your challenge to a duel.

The duel number is '12'.

Bung now stands before you in the Graven Circle.

On the Referee's command, you bow, and then you may commence casting at
will...

Duel Status for Froodal:

 Froodal HP: 15 State: thinking (orders)

  Right: B
  Left:  B

 Bung HP: 15 State: thinking

  Right: B
  Left:  B

  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

You can see that they are told the game number, for reference in
future orders, and the status of each player.  Each wizard starts with
15 Hit Points (HP), representing the amount of damage that he can
take.  The server is expecting orders from each player.  Each player
has just bowed (indicated by the 'B' for each of his hands).

Each player now goes on to submit a gesture for each hand each round.
This is what might happen...

Turn  Froodal                                Bung
----  ----------                             -----------
      LH      RH     HP                      LH      RH     HP
1      W       D     15                       W       P*    15
2      W       S     15                       W       S     15
3      W       F*    14                       S*      D*    15
4      S*      F     14                       S       >     15
5      >       F*     9                       C*      C*     9
6      C*      C*     9                       D       F      9
7      P*      W      9                       P*      >      9
8      P*      D      8                       W*      >      9
9      >       D      8                       D       S      8
10     C*      C*     7                       D       D      3
11     W*      W*     7                       C*      C*    -2

       Outright Victory to Froodal.


A "*" shows a gesture that completes a spell.

1) Froodal makes the classic "Disease" opening.  He is planning to
cast Disease with his right hand, throwing in Confusion and Paralyze
on the way ("DSFFFc").  He starts with a 'W' with his left hand,
planning to use that as the beginnings of a Counter Spell ("WWS") for
the third round, to counter any possible 3-gesture enchantments that
Bung makes.

Bung makes a less conventional opening - two defensive gestures.
He does 'W' with his left hand for the same reason as Froodal.  He
casts a shield with his right.  This is usually done in anticipation
of the opponent opening with a stab.  However, Bung has something else
in mind...

2) In the second round Froodal continues as planned.  Bung sees the
potential Confusion coming, and continues with his left hand Counter
Spell.  With his right hand Bung follows the 'P' with an 'S' - he is
leading towards Summon Ogre or Charm Person!

3) Froodal is now under pressure.  He doesn't know what Bung will be
doing with his right hand, and can see that whatever it is, it is
going to complete in the 4th round instead of the third.  Furthermore,
Bung is going to Counter his Confusion successfully.  Froodal
continues with the Confusion anyhow (leading on to the Paralyze) and
prolongs his left hand Counter Spell by one turn - wasting a gesture.

Bung feels in control as he fires a Magic Missile with his right hand,
leading on towards Charm Person in the next turn, and Counter's
Froodal's Confusion with his left hand.  He is now up in HP on Froodal
and is planning to continue to inflict damage as quickly as
possible...

4) This round Froodal completes his Counter Spell, with which he
planned to counter Bung's Charm Person.  However, Bung saw that his
spell was going to be countered so didn't bother completing it.
Instead he stabs with his right, while progressing towards Ice Storm
with his left!  However, the shield effect of Counter Spell prevents the
damage, and Froodal breathes a sigh of relief!

5) Froodal completes his Paralyze as Bung completes an Ice Storm.
Froodal knows that next turn he is going to be clapping for the
Disease, so anything other than a stab with his left hand would be
wasted.  After the Ice Storm and stab, both mages are on 9 HP.

6) Froodal now claps to complete the Disease spell.  This puts the
pressure onto Bung.  Bung now has to kill Froodal or cure the Disease
within the next 6 rounds.  He opts to try to cure the Disease with
Dispel Magic - he has already made the 'c' last turn, so he goes on
with the 'D' this turn.

Meanwhile, Bung's right hand is Paralyzed into a 'F' gesture for this
round by Froodal's Paralyze spell of last round.

7) With Bung busy curing his disease, Froodal can take the
initiative.  He starts a Lightning Bolt ("WDDc")  with his right hand.
He can see that Bung is going for damage, and may try a stab, so he
does a Shield with his left hand.   This pays off, because that is
exactly what Bung does.

8) Now Bung can complete his Dispel Magic.  This is another bad
round for Froodal, because he can't defend himself with a Shield
(since the Dispel Magic will negate the Shield) - but he doesn't
realize it.  Bung makes the most of it, and stabs.

9) Bung now needs to continue damaging Froodal.  He uses the last
'W' of the Dispel Magic to move into a Lightning Bolt of his own, and
prepares to cast a Summon Goblin with his right hand ("SFW").

Froodal sees another opportunity for a stab, and takes it, while
continuing with his Lightning Bolt.

10) Froodal completes the Lightning Bolt, and Bung takes 5 more
damage.  Bung realized he would not be able to cast Summon Goblin
and at the same time complete the Lightening Bolt, so he opted
for a Magic Missile with his right han instead, which struck home.
Bung is still confident, because he expect his Lightning Bolt to
be crippling Froodal next turn.

11) Disaster for Bung!  Froodal immediately follows his Lightning
Bolt with a Magic Mirror.  Bung's own Lightning Bolt is reflected back
at him and he is killed!

----------------------------------------------------------------------


CREDITS

This game was designed as a pen-and-paper game by Richard Bartle
<76703.3042@compuserve.com>.

The rules were taken from Duel Purpose fanzine (written by Mike Lean)
and then scanned, OCRed, and edited by Andrew Buchanan
<buchanan@heron.enet.dec.com> March 3, 1993.

Martin Gregory <mgregory@ieee.org> found the rules in "The Games Cabinet"...

 http://www.gamecabinet.com/
 http://www.gamecabinet.com/rules/WavingHands.html

... and adapted them for play-by-email, writing the original Firetop
Mountain server.

Steve Andrewartha <steve.andrewartha@its.utas.edu.au> was enthusiastic
at the critical moment, and most importantly found a possible home for
the game...

Richard Rognlie <rrognlie@gamerz.net> kindly gave it a chance at
life by agreeing to run it on his PBEM server (pbmserv@vtsu.prc.com),
and now on his new server (fm@gamerz.net).

Mel Nicholson <Mel.Nicholson@eng.sun.com> and Terje Brten
<terjebr@pvv.ntnu.no> had ideas about how the server could be improved
and contributed code to suit, along with some bug fixes to the
existing code.

John Williams <jaw@us.dynix.com>, after getting the all time top
score, did a major upgrade to the code to make it possible for
multi-player battles to take place.  Terje took this code and breathed
life into it by adding a new challenge system and many enhancements,
and by running the test-site for the code we have today.

Dom Gallagher <dom@stayfree.co.uk> and Andy Kurnia <akur@gamerz.net>
proof-read the rules, and corrected a million typos! Andy Kurnia
has also later contributed some new code. Robin Gyver
<robin@kelp.boston.ma.us> has also helped proof-read the rules.

Martin Gregory had for many years been maintaining his code
as the sole Firetop Mountain Janitor, but then Terje Brten
became a co-Janitor together with Martin.

Later Martin retired from his janitor duties, and Terje became
the new main Firetop Mountain Janitor. Soon after Craig Ferguson
<craigferguson@shaw.ca> and Andy Kurnia also joined in as members
of the Firetop Mountain Janitor team.
